Learning Notes: Introduction to Linux for Data Engineers
Objectives

By the end of this module, learners will:

    Understand the role of Linux in data engineering and server management.

    Navigate the Linux file system hierarchy and execute basic commands.

    Apply permissions and security principles (e.g., chmod, sudo).

    Write simple bash scripts for automation.

    Recognize Linux distributions (Ubuntu, Fedora) and their use cases.

    Grasp core concepts like "everything is a file" and kernel functionality.

Key Concepts

    Linux Basics

        Distributions (Distros): Ubuntu, Fedora, Debian. All share the Linux kernel but differ in tools/packaging.

        Kernel: Core component managing hardware/software interactions.

        Shell: Command-line interface (e.g., Bash) for executing commands.

    File System Structure

        Root (/): Base directory. Key subdirectories:

            /bin: Essential user binaries (e.g., ls, cp).

            /home: User-specific files.

            /etc: Configuration files.

            /dev: Hardware devices (e.g., disks, USB drives).

            /var: Logs, databases, and variable data.

        Everything is a file: Hardware, processes, and directories are treated as files.

    Permissions & Security

        Users/Groups:

            root: Superuser with full system access.

            Regular users operate with restricted privileges.

        File Permissions:

            Format: -rwxr--r-- (User/Group/Others).

            chmod: Change permissions (e.g., chmod 755 script.sh).

        Principle of Least Privilege: Restrict access to minimize risks.

    Essential Commands

        ls -l: List files with details.

        sudo: Execute commands as root.

        cd, pwd: Navigate directories.

        cp, mv, rm: Copy, move, delete files (Caution: rm -r deletes recursively!).

        man [command]: Access manual pages.

    Scripting Basics

        Bash Scripts: Automate tasks using commands/variables.

        Example:
        bash
        Copy

        #!/bin/bash
        echo "Hello, $USER!"
        echo "Today is $(date)"

Questions for Review

    File System: What is the purpose of /etc vs. /var?

    Permissions: How would you grant read/write access to a group for data.txt?

    Security: Why should you avoid running processes as root?

    Commands: What does ls -a do, and when would you use it?

    Philosophy: Explain the statement "Everything is a file" in Linux.

Practical Exercise

Task: Create a bash script that:

    Lists all files in the current directory.

    Creates a backup folder.

    Copies all .txt files into the backup folder.
    Hint: Use mkdir, cp, and wildcards (*.txt).

Additional Resources:

    Practice Linux online: DistroSea or JS/UNIX.

    Explore chmod calculator: chmod Calculator.
