Objectives

    Reinforce Pandas Skills:

        Grouping, sorting, merging DataFrames.

        Using regular expressions (RegEx) for data cleaning.

        Handling multi-indexing and data aggregation.

    Introduce Algorithmic Thinking:

        Define algorithms and their role in problem-solving.

        Understand pseudocode and abstraction.

        Analyze efficiency and correctness in algorithm design.

    Prepare for Advanced Topics:

        Explore real-world applications (e.g., Google’s PageRank).

        Transition to parallel programming and Spark (next session).

Key Concepts

    Pandas Data Manipulation:

        Grouping & Aggregation:

            Use groupby() with methods like mean(), sum(), size(), or custom aggregations.

            Example: Calculate average height by gender:
            python

            df.groupby('gender')['height_cm'].mean()  

        Sorting:

            sort_values(by=['column'], ascending=False) sorts data.

        Merging Data:

            Use pd.merge() or join() with parameters like on, how, and suffixes.

        Multi-Indexing:

            Reset indices with reset_index() to simplify complex grouped data.

    Regular Expressions (RegEx):

        Tools like RegEx101 help test patterns.

        Example: Extract email domains using re.findall(r'@(\w+\.\w+)', text).

    Algorithmic Thinking:

        Definition: A finite set of instructions to solve a problem.

        Characteristics of Good Algorithms:

            Correctness, efficiency, clarity, and finite termination.

        Pseudocode: A bridge between human logic and code (e.g., steps for a loop).

        Abstraction: Simplify complex problems by focusing on essentials (e.g., Google Maps directions).

    Real-World Applications:

        PageRank Algorithm: Ranks web pages based on link quality/quantity.

        Adaptive Learning: Adjusts question difficulty based on user performance.

Questions for Review

    Pandas:

        How would you use groupby() to find the maximum weight per gender in a DataFrame?

        What is the purpose of reset_index() after grouping data?

    Algorithm Design:

        Write pseudocode for a loop that prints numbers 1-10.

        Why is an "end condition" critical in loops? Give an example of a broken loop without one.

    Concepts:

        What distinguishes an algorithm from programming?

        Explain abstraction using the example of a recipe.

    Real-World Analysis:

        How does Google’s PageRank algorithm determine a webpage’s importance?

        What are potential pitfalls of an algorithm that lacks efficiency?

Next Session Preview: Parallel programming with Spark and deeper algorithm optimization techniques.
Key Tools to Explore: pyspark, efficiency analysis (time complexity).
